In the previous video we saw how to run
the app hello world app on an emulator.
In this video I will connect a real
Android device my own Android Nexus 5x
phone and run our app on that. Now if
you're using Windows it is important
that you installed a Google USB driver
when we configured Android studio using
the SDK manager
in the earlier video in section 2 and in
addition depending on the model of phone
you may need to install download and
install a specific driver for your phone
that's only if you're running on Windows
now on a Mac or Linux machine however
you can just plug the device in it it'll
works so that's a bit easy when I'm
going to be doing this on my Mac. So I'm
going to assume that in the case of
Windows you've got the necessary drivers
installed and you can connect your phone
to your computer using a USB cable to
transfer files now if you have any
problems doing that then you do need to
resolve them before continuing with this
video Samsung phones on Windows for
example need kies installed on
Windows or certainly did at the time I'm
recording this video, so do check if
you're running on Windows if there's
specific software drivers needed for
your Android device to communicate with
Windows. Alright so that said the first
thing to check before using your phone
to run your apps on is to make sure that
you can transfer files from the phone or
tablet and if you can't do that than
anything else we try to do isn't going
to work now some phones come with USB
cables that are for charging only they
don't allow data transfer and if you get
problems copying photos for example from
your phone to your computer then do try
a different cable we have seen problems
in the past that can be resolved with a
new cable so certainly if you're having
issues do try using a separate cable now
if you've got normal file transfer
working though then let's get started
running apps on a real device. Now I've
got some software that I'm about to
start on my phone that lets me record
the phone screen, so that I can show you
what's happening on my phone as well as
what's happening in Android studio so
I'm going to switch over to the phone
now start the recording and allow you to
see what's actually going on on my phone.
Alright so now you can see that my
screen my Nexus 5x screen is showing
and what we're going to do is enable the
developer options on this phone
now developer options aren't in any of
the normal settings menus instead
they're actually hidden until you enable
them and in my case we go into settings
to actually do that so I'm going to come
down here go into my settings and this
may be slightly different depending on
the phone that you're running but in the
case of the Google Nexus 5x I scroll
down to the bottom. Okay, so I want
someone this settings menu I'm going to
click on system in my case so it'll be
something along the lines of settings
about phone you need to get to the menu
that has the about phone option so I
click on system in my case you can see
down the bottom here I've got about
phone and what I can do there now is I
could actually click on that and that
brings us to this about phone option.
Now just before I scroll down to the bottom
and the his build number do note that
this option he hasn't got a developer's
menu option at the moment so what that
means is it's not enabled so in the case
of my phone this is where that Pena will
appear so I'll go into about phone and
you'll need to find that for your device
so get down here scroll down to the
bottom we've got this build number as
you can see here, so what we need to do
is actually tap that seven times when
you do that you get a message that
developer options have been enabled and
it's not very intuitive but that's
deliberate so it prevents people from
turning developer options on without
knowing what they are or what they're
for and in the case of using an Android
device for testing we need to have that
developers option so I'm going to tap
this build number seven times you'll
notice that we've got a menu a little
toast message popping up there now and
I've only got up this machines message
here and because I'm using a Google
Nexus 5x I've got a pattern that I can
specify to unlock this phone but if
you're you didn't have a pattern you
might have a pin or some other mechanism
to unlock the phone at this point so I'm
just going to unlock this and continue
and now you can see that it says down
the bottom you are now a developer so
basically tapping the build number seven
times turns on the developer options and
lets you use the phone for development
purposes, which we want to do in this
course so you know should have a new
menu on your phone it should either been this me
you hear if we go back one you can see
now that we've got this menu developer
options showing on the screen now which
wasn't there before. So your first
challenge in this course is if you're
not running a Google Nexus 5x is to find
that menu on your phone, so in my case
you can see there so I'm going to click
on developer options. Now there's a host
of options and then developer options
menu but we're only really interested in
two of them at this stage and only one
is really important now the first one is
stay awake you can see that on the
screen there and this prevents the phone
from locking while it's charging so you
won't have to keep unlocking it or
testing your app it saves a bit of time
and annoyance but if you don't have that
option then don't worry but if you do
have it then it might be a good idea to
ticket and that's if you have something
like a password or pattern there's no
case to unlock your phone so I'm going
to select that anyway to leave it on so
that you'll never sleep all charging so
that the sames has a bit of tom during
our testing but the important test
setting is USB debugging so I need to
scroll down a little bit to see that and
there's USB debugging and the debugging
menu there now without this one set you
won't be able to test apps on your
device from Android studio so you need
to make sure you turn on USB debugging
so I'm going to do that and you can see
we've got this pop-up and you'll
probably get a similar message on your
phone and it's asking us to confirm that
we want to allow us debugging in this
case that's forward because we are using
it for development purposes I'm going to
click on OK so once that's done you want
to plug one end of the USB cable into
the phone and the other into the
computer, so I'm going to stay on my
phone display and select that there and
play my device in but just before that
what I'm going to do is switch back to
Android studio and I want to bring up
the screen where we normally start our
app so I'm gonna come back to there now
so we're going to click on the run menu
and you can see here on the list of
connected devices at the moment there's
nothing there's only the virtual device
that we've previously configured that we
ran our app in in the last video there's
nothing under connected devices I'm
going to come back to that shortly but
for now we'll go back to the screen on
my phone again I'm going to plug in the
cable and I've now got this message
appearing on my phone it says allow USB
debugging and it's giving me the
a message about the computers RSA key
fingerprint which I have to obscure for
security reasons but it's just basically
a large number and it's asking us
whether we want to allow that and we
switch back over to Android studio
quickly you can see at the moment under
connected devices there's a code there
and it says offline at the moment so
what I'm going to do now if I switch
back to my phone's display is I'm going
to click on always allow from this
computer because this is going to be my
major main test computer and I'm going
to click on OK
and once we do that we'll switch back
over to Android studio time ok there.
and now if we switch back to Android studio
you can see under connected devices this
LG Nexus 5x and that'll be your phone's
model and tells you also the API that's
running in my case I'm running Android 8
on this phone API 26, I've now got a
device that we can actually test on so
basically what we've done is we've set
up the phone and allowed it or given it
access so that we can use it to run
applications to test and again with the
deployment target on you can see that
we've got this Nexus 5x available it's
an option here which wasn't there before
and we've still got our available
virtual device which is for running the
emulator but we've never got a real
device as well which are going to be
using to run now. So you can use the same
mechanism and some views before you can
just come up here and select run and
choose either the connected device and
just if I unplug the USB cable now so
I'll do now you can see that that then
disappears connected device is known and
if I plug it back in again give it a
moment you can see that it actually
comes back again, so once we've done that
one time configuration you'll be able to
access this without going into any menus
or sitting anything else up and keep in
mind that if you're running on Windows
you should probably also disconnect the
device properly from the taskbar as he
would like a USB memory stick or
something on those lines but obviously
in my case on a Mac I haven't known
anything to the phone storage have
written any data to the phone so it was
ok just to unplug it. Now if your phone
doesn't appear or you can see you can't
see its full name or the serial number
that probably means that you haven't
ticked the USB debugging and the
developers options that I showed you
earlier in this video
or that you haven't allowed access from
your computer. In my case, let's actually try
running this I'm gonna
okay to start it running and they were
going to switch back to my Google Nexus
5x phone and check that it works you got
okay and I go back to the phone now and
you can see there on my phone that the
app was launched automatically and we've
got the hello world application now
running on my Google Nexus 5x now by the
way you don't need to be running oreo
api 26 on your phone as long as your
phone is running API 17 or higher then
the app should work but if your phone
isn't running at least the minimum SDK
that we set you'll get a message when
you select the vise and click ok,
and in fact looking at the slide here
you'll see that there was actually a an
indication of this in the phone's
description before clicking ok, so again
your phone needs to be running the
minimum SDK that we set which was API 17
when we configured this project. Now if
that's the only physical device you've
got, you can change the minimum SDK you
can go to file project structure and
file project structure,
I mean click on app down here and you
can see we've got on the flavors tab
come over here the flavors we've got
minimum SDK version and you can change
that to match the version of Android
running on your phone and we can select
that, but actually it doesn't really
matter what's available is to drop down
because what you can actually do is you
can just type the API number that you
want to set into the box, so for example
if you're using an API 16 device you
change the 17 to a 16 just by typing it,
click ok and the project updates you see
down the bottom grad was working away
and from that point when you go to run
it again after it finished updating
you'd be able to run that on your
phone assuming in this particular case
it was an API 16 device but in the case
of what we did I was going to go back
and make that change again go back into
project structure. Now click on flavors
I'm going to set it back to what it was
which was in my case 17 being the
minimum version that we defined the
start of this project, so this is example
was long issue phones running API 17 or higher,
it should work fine if not you just need
to change the minimum SDK level as you
saw me do there, but with 96% of devices
now running API 17 or higher it should
be fine in most cases, so that's it
that's how to run an app on your phone
rather than using an emulator so it's
running fine as you saw and I'll go back
now briefly to the phone nail and if I
actually rotate it into landscape so
I'll move the phone, you can see the app
successfully changes to the landscape
automatically so that's it how to run an
app on your physical device so as long
as you've enabled developer options by
tapping seven times as you saw me do you
can turn USB debugging on whenever you
want to use your phone to test your apps
and you may want to switch off USB
debugging when you're done just remember
to turn it on again when you come back
to developing on it but there's nothing
wrong with leaving USB debugging on if
that's something you want to do when
you're testing on a regular basis.
Alright so that's the end of this section
in the next section we're going to start
creating proper applications and and I'm
going to be explaining some of the
concepts like main activity and layouts
and so forth in more detail we haven't
done any programming yet but we've never
got the development environment set up
and we can now run apps using emulators
and physical devices so we're ready to start.